# credit-risk-classification
Module 20 Challenge

## Credit Risk Analysis Report

### Overview of the Analysis
The purpose of this analysis is to determine, based on the predictive model used, the degree to which healthy vs high risk loans are identified appropriately.

 The dataset used was lending data generated by edX Boot Camps LLC.  
 
 The lending data included loan size, interest rate, borrower income, debt to income ratio, number of accounts, derogatory marks, total debt, and loan status (whether the loan is healthy or has a high risk of defaulting). The purpose of this analysis is to predict whether future accounts would be considered high risk or healthy based on the factors listed above.

 To do this, the lending data was separated into 2 datasets, one set for training and one set for testing.  This was accomplished using the sklearn module train_test_split.  

 After the lending data was separated into 2 datasets, an instance of a linear logistic regression model from sklearn was initiated and the training dataset was fitted to the logistic regression model.

 After fitting the training data to the logistic regression model, the fitted model was used to make predictions about the remaining portion of the lending data (the testing dataset).

 Using sklearn metrics, the model was assessed based on the accuracy score,  confusion matrix, and classification report of its predictions for the testing dataset.

### Results
- Machine Learning Model:
    - Confusion Matrix Scores:
        - 0.299% Testing Loans Falsely Identified as Healthy (56/18,719)
        - 15.338% Testing Loans Falsely Identified as High Risk (102/665)
    - Balanced Accuracy Score:
        - 95.2%
    - Precision Score:
        - 99.7% for healthy loans (rounded to 100% in classification report)
        - 85% for high risk loans
    - Recall Score:
        - 99% for healthy loans
        - 91% for high risk loans

### Summary
The model has high accuracy (95%), and has higher precision determining healthy loans than determining high-risk loans. This is likely due to the training size of the high-risk loans, as there were significantly fewer training data for high-risk loans than healthy loans. The model identified nearly twice as many loans incorrectly as high risk than those it identified incorrectly as healthy loans (102 vs 56). This may lead to an overall-bias toward identifying more loans being flagged as high-risk than is accurate. 

Overall, this model seems adequate for initial loan classification. The model is recommended for predicting the classification of loans as healthy or high-risk.  Additional oversight with regard to those loans classified as high-risk is also recommended to prevent a disproportionate amount of healthy loans from being classified as high-risk for the company.

**************************************************
## Overall Project Requirements
Split the Data into Training and Testing Sets (30 points)
- To receive all points, you must:
    - Read the lending_data.csv data from the Resources folder into a Pandas DataFrame. (5 points)
    - Create the labels set (y) from the “loan_status” column, and then create the features (X) DataFrame from the remaining columns. (10 points)
    - Split the data into training and testing datasets by using train_test_split. (15 points)

Create a Logistic Regression Model (30 points)
- To receive all points, you must:
    - Fit a logistic regression model by using the training data (X_train and y_train). (10 points)
    - Save the predictions on the testing data labels by using the testing feature data (X_test) and the fitted model. (5 points)
    - Evaluate the model’s performance by doing the following:
        - Generate a confusion matrix. (5 points)
        - Generate a classification report. (5 points)
        - Answer the following question: How well does the logistic regression model predict both the 0 (healthy loan) and 1 (high-risk loan) labels? (5 points)

Write a Credit Risk Analysis Report (20 points)
- To receive all points, you must:
    - Provide an overview that explains the purpose of this analysis. (5 points)
    - Using a bulleted list, describe the accuracy, precision, and recall scores of the machine learning model. (5 points)
    - Summarize the results from the machine learning model. Include your justification for recommending the model for use by the company. If you don’t recommend the model, justify your reasoning. (10 points)

Coding Conventions and Formatting (10 points)
- To receive all points, you must:
    - Place imports at the top of the file, just after any module comments and docstrings and before module globals and constants. (3 points)
    - Name functions and variables with lowercase characters, with words separated by underscores. (2 points)
    - Follow DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) principles, creating maintainable and reusable code. (3 points)
    - Use concise logic and creative engineering where possible. (2 points)

Code Comments (10 points)
- To receive all points, your code must:
    - Be well commented with concise, relevant notes that other developers can understand. (10 points)

**************************************************
## Overall Project Instructions
The instructions for this Challenge are divided into the following subsections:
- Split the Data into Training and Testing Sets
- Create a Logistic Regression Model with the Original Data
- Write a Credit Risk Analysis Report

Split the Data into Training and Testing Sets
- Open the starter code notebook and use it to complete the following steps:
    - Read the lending_data.csv data from the Resources folder into a Pandas DataFrame.
    - Create the labels set (y) from the “loan_status” column, and then create the features (X) DataFrame from the remaining columns.
    - Split the data into training and testing datasets by using train_test_split.


NOTE
A value of 0 in the “loan_status” column means that the loan is healthy. A value of 1 means that the loan has a high risk of defaulting.


Create a Logistic Regression Model with the Original Data
- Use your knowledge of logistic regression to complete the following steps:
    - Fit a logistic regression model by using the training data (X_train and y_train).
    - Save the predictions for the testing data labels by using the testing feature data (X_test) and the fitted model.
    - Evaluate the model’s performance by doing the following:
        - Generate a confusion matrix.
        - Print the classification report.
    - Answer the following question: How well does the logistic regression model predict both the 0 (healthy loan) and 1 (high-risk loan) labels?

Write a Credit Risk Analysis Report
- Write a brief report that includes a summary and analysis of the performance of the machine learning models that you used in this homework. You should write this report as the README.md file included in your GitHub repository.
- Structure your report by using the report template that Starter_Code.zip includes, ensuring that it contains the following:
    - An overview of the analysis: Explain the purpose of this analysis.
    - The results: Using a bulleted list, describe the accuracy score, the precision score, and recall score of the machine learning model.
    - A summary: Summarize the results from the machine learning model. Include your justification for recommending the model for use by the company. If you don’t recommend the model, justify your reasoning.